hello everyone
i'm going to read to you today something
i've been working on well for many
decades i would say really but
more intensely and specifically in the
last four months i've reviewed it with a
lot of people around the world i
it's called a conservative manifesto and
it's an attempt to
begin the process of outlining a
positive vision for the future on the
center right and classic liberal front
i decided to entitle it a conservative
manifesto i played with the title
something approximating
a manifesto of canonical western virtues
but i felt that was a weaker title and i
also felt that it was time to
make a
statement on the metaphysical level
let's say
on the center conservative side
conservatives are very concerned with
tradition and community and
responsibility and those are all
virtues and values that have been under
tremendous pressure in recent years and
so
after reviewing both documents because i
wrote two versions
one on the canonical western value side
i decided that the conservative
manifesto
title and conceptualization was stronger
now as i said i'm trying to outline a
positive vision for the future and this
is a very difficult thing to do and this
is a test case i suppose to see how
people respond because i would like
people to respond well i would like to
outline a vision that's very enticing to
people that wouldn't require compulsion
to implement that would get people on
board voluntarily and so anyways this is
a
metaphysical inquiry
and so what might that mean you can
think about levels of profundity at the
base the most profound ideas are
theological for better or worse by
definition because they deal with what's
eternal and sacred
on top of that is a metaphysical
foundation and that's where philosophy
lies and then out of that emerges such
things as
normative communication and social
policy
and normative discourse and so this is a
long ways down the hierarchy towards the
foundation but it's time for a
discussion of foundational principles
part of the culture war that's
raging around us is in fact an argument
about cultural fundamentals
and so
well i'm going to read this now it's
long and it's difficult and i have to
read it because it's pushing the limits
of my cognitive ability and i had to
write it i can't do it
spontaneously it's too complex and so i
hope you'll bear with me and you'll find
it useful i suspect it will require
several listenings for people who are
really committed to it
and you can choose to be committed to it
or not as you see fit so i'm going to
launch into it and it's titled as i said
a conservative manifesto uh that's a
play a bit on the communist manifesto
this is a conservative manifesto so i
suppose one among many
and i don't imagine it'll be the last
word on that front it's not designed to
be
a propaganda tool
it's designed to be a an invitation
let's say and so
onward with it
a conservative manifesto
introduction
a profound crisis of meaning currently
afflicts
destabilizes
and demoralizes
the sovereign citizens of the west and
the social institutions upon which we
depend that crisis has increasingly
spread to the remainder of the world's
people generating confusion
and sowing distrust
producing a counterproductive discord in
place of the peaceful voluntary
cooperation and competition
that could instead reign over and unite
us
that crisis is in the first place the
consequence of a corrosive doubt
sold not least
by the careless intellect
regarding the value of the principles of
value aim in action
that have heretofore inspired guided and
stabilized us that crisis is in the
second place
the consequence of the historically
unprecedented realization of our
ignorance
about the ultimate source nature and
reality of those principles and our
resultant inability to formulate and
communicate a clear moral justification
for their existence that crisis is in
the third place
the consequence of the presumptuous
premature and finally
narrowly self-serving insistence arising
from that doubt and ignorance
that nothing but the will to power the
willingness and desire to dominate and
exploit
motivates all individual perceptions and
actions and gives rise to and maintains
all social institutions
that crisis is finally
use
of the frustration and resentment that
necessarily arises
when doubt ignorance and intellectual
pride combine
to demonize divide and exploit to insist
upon an impossible and final conceptual
certitude
and to demand recognition of a false and
unearned moral virtue
that crisis
itself in the idolatrous battles
simultaneously petty and terrible
that currently divide our world
in the disputes about identity that lead
astray
and render hopeless
in the stoking of suspicion between men
and women in the insistence that enmity
must divide black brown and white
in the subjugation of the education that
should enlighten
to the ideologies that possess in the
cycle of accusation
that threatens the trust upon which
peace and prosperity necessarily depends
and
in the panicked
anti-human
apocalyptic doom saying
that undermines the spirit of our sons
and daughters
what can those of us who attempt to
abide by and manifest a courageous faith
in the traditional values of our past
offer
in such times not
the thoughtless and instrumental appeal
to cynicism and bitterness associated
with the insistence that our social and
political institutions are fundamentally
unreliable corrupt and untrustworthy not
the harsh and condemnatory exhortation
or demand to accept and uphold a moral
code noteworthy only for its joylessness
sterility and tendency to forbid and
damn
instead
the confident and forthright
transmission
of the abandoned eternal verities
to all of those who currently wander
thirst and starve
in their absence
what are the values
of paramount importance to the
conservative temperament
currently crying out for rediscovery
reconsideration
and discussion
an inevitably incomplete but crucially
necessary list might include
humility
liberty
autonomy truth
agency
identity
merit
responsibility tradition
community
stewardship
justice
and unity
to that list
might be profitably appended a set of
propositions
about the true nature and source of
absolute privation the inevitability of
economic inequality
and
the practical realities of the
individual competence
upon which psychological integrity and
social contract equally
and mutually depend
humility
humility is the opposite of the prideful
authoritarian arrogance
that insists upon the possession of
comprehensive and final
skill and knowledge
to revere humility
is to accept the insufficiency of
current presumption
to acknowledge the value of attending to
what is not yet known to listen to
value and attempt to truly understand
the opinions of others no matter how
ill-formed
to strive to gain further knowledge
and to convince and invite instead of
insisting and compelling
humility is therefore a fundamental
precondition for learning
for the revivifying meaningful
engagement that learning produces
and for the maintenance and renovation
of what has already been validly learned
established
and universally valued
liberty
liberty is valuable not because it
enables the hedonism that heedlessly
sacrifices the future and the community
to the narrowly conceptualized present
and the impulsive needs and wants of the
individual
liberty is valuable because it allows
all free and unique people
the opportunity to best confront
the potential of the future
to engage in the voluntary productive
reciprocal interactions that make
peaceful mutually sustaining social life
possible
to speak the truth that redeems and
renews and to adopt the responsibility
of citizenship
and ethical endeavor
liberty enables people to think
authentically
and without arbitrary constraints
privately and publicly liberty allows
people to employ that unconstrained
authentic thought to imagine a diverse
set of possibilities
to singly and jointly assess criticize
prioritize and improve them
and to choose from those diverse
criticized and improved possibilities
the most evidently valuable compelling
path
forward
autonomy
the emergent problems that constantly
beset us and simultaneously offer new
opportunities
can only be addressed by the continual
provision of equally unpredictable and
variable sets of solutions
such provision is best insured
by valuing and encouraging development
of the widest possible range of
productive activities and enterprises
from which variation might be drawn
the most appropriate solutions
autonomous citizens can bring the
individual differences of their
temperament experience and skill
to bear
on the problem of adaptation itself
autonomous people and institutions as
widely distributed as possible are free
to vary in their response
to the particularized demands of their
local environments
from that variant pool
all
individuals free to communicate and
assess
can derive the solutions most apt
and efficiently match to their current
situations and problems
widely distributed autonomous local
activities
allow for the establishment of resilient
large-scale unified systems
optimally resistant to the rapid and
dangerous spread of any given
unpredictable emergent problem
optimally able to respond
with timely and particularized solutions
the principle of autonomy therefore
enables abundant provision
in relation to the necessities and
luxuries of life
maximal choice regarding the manner in
which that provision will occur
and diverse opportunities for meaningful
sustaining engagement
in the voluntary productive and
sustainable private and social endeavors
that best produce abundance
and choice
free markets best fulfill the need for
autonomy local activity
and wide distribution
their superiority to all other known and
likely possible systems given that
fulfillment
should be unapologetically recognized
and promoted by those dedicated
to the canonical values of the west no
other systems allow for the crucial and
ever-changing decisions about what is
currently valuable to be made
by the uncompelled choice and voluntary
endeavor of the widest possible number
of people no other systems allow
for the sampling and aggregation of the
myriad of widely varying and
particularized thoughts and decisions
constituted
by that free choice
and voluntary endeavor
no other system
therefore does or apparently can operate
in the manner that makes continued
adaptation to the unpredictable horizon
of the future
both possible and desirable
truth
the future
genuinely and unpredictably differs
from the past
in consequence a continual array of
complex and unforeseen problems present
themselves before us
demanding redress
a diverse honest and freely exchanged
range of thoughts pertaining to those
problems
is the eternal precondition
for the possibility of solution itself
as well as for its dissemination
there are many valid productive and
attractive ways of looking at and acting
in the world and a variety of
perspectives is simultaneously necessary
strategically appropriate
and inevitable
it is also forever the case however that
discipline striving in a single
direction
fortifies
and unifies
that an ethic capable of uniting diverse
citizens in trust and peace
is necessary and desirable
and the truth itself is never to be
finally found in a particular set of
facts or body of knowledge
the genuine striving forward ethically
instead
is the very embodiment of truth
and therefore the most valid
manifestation
of truth itself
the humble attempt to advance ourselves
and others through discourse as a
consequence of listening and spontaneous
response
is
instead
the very embodiment of truth
the willingness to reach in good faith
across the divides of race sex economic
class and political temperament is
instead
the very embodiment of truth
the divisive insistence
on the absolute relativity of truth
can be combated not least with the
realization that truth is a process not
a state
the realization finally that the
adventure of life
is to be found precisely in pursuit of
the truth
constitutes the only real antidote to
the corrosive nihilism that justifies
deception hopelessness
cynicism
and abdication of responsibility
the most fundamental freedoms upon which
virtuous states and polities depend
freedom of speech and thought foremost
above them
exist
not
for the impulsive gratification of
momentary pleasures
but so that the truth that redeems
find its living expression
agency
the insistence that we are almost
appropriately conceptualized at the
level of the group
whether by sexual preference race gender
political belief or ethnicity
provides
the counter opportunity for
conservatives to re-establish and
reinforce the bedrock notion and
principle
of the sovereignty of the individual
which attributes to each person
the capacity to advance and progress
in the face of uncertainty malevolence
and adversity
those with
truly canonical western views can as
well
oppose
the demoralizing notions
of the essential corruption of all human
activity and its putative basis in
nothing but oppression and compulsion
with the knowledge that the desire to
strive forward is in its essential form
a manifestation of the spirit of
voluntary cooperation
the desire for productive reciprocal
social interaction
and the reality of genuine good will
the ambition that overcomes privation
and penury
the urge to adventure toward greatness
the desire to marry the wish to have a
family the willingness to shoulder
responsibility all this
is truly and genuinely admirable and
worthy of recognition and reward all
this constitutes the basis of any truly
stable and desirable state
psychological and social alike
with attendant duties voluntarily
undertaken
and attendant rewards
validly earned and distributed
all this is furthermore
the most reliable basis for any true
sustainability
identity
a sophisticated and adaptive identity is
in no wise established
through the mere insistence that a felt
sense of subjective feeling must
dominate and prevail
identity is instead the result of
continual and iterated communication
cooperation and competition
between parents and children husbands
and wives
friends colleagues subordinates
superiors
and the present and future selves
of sovereign individuals
identity is therefore and must remain a
carefully and justly negotiated
agreement between the individual and
society at every level of that society
conservatives
can therefore offer a revitalized
conception of sovereign citizenship
as the most meaningful and significant
form of identity
the sovereign citizenship that makes
each person
a credit to themselves
a reliable partner in marriage a caring
judicious and discriminating parent
a trustworthy and competent partner in
enterprise an active participant in
local and distal civic institutions
and an informed enlightened and ethical
political actor and voter
this is all predicated upon
conceptualizing and articulating the
need
for a shift in the western individual's
moral outlook away from the narrowly
hedonistic blandishments of endless
rights and externally bestowed
privileges
and toward the constructive rewards
attendant upon a mature sacrifice duty
responsibility
and reciprocity
merit
individuals vary widely in their
abilities across the entire range of
human endeavor
a small number of highly productive
people
operating within all domains of human
creative endeavor account
for most of the production and progress
a direct relationship therefore obtains
between the recognition and promotion of
excellence
and the ability for societies to
ameliorate absolute privation to
generate and disseminate creative
solutions to new and unexpected problems
to provide opportunity for individual
and social flourishing and advancement
and to justly and effectively reward
those endeavoring to be productive
successful and generous the tight causal
connection
between merit
and consequence
means that pure merit can be defined
objectively by the ability to undertake
the work and build the social networks
associated with goals valued by the free
choice of actors in the free
marketplaces of friendship community
association consumer choice employment
opportunity
and political decision
such merit
has been validly however partially and
imperfectly
and must remain
the fundamental principle governing
selection placement and advancement
in our social institutions
responsibility
every individual requires a purpose
to offset the tragedy of life
every person needs something of true
value
to set against the anxiety frustration
disappointment grief and pain
of mortal existence
that purpose is not to be found in the
cynicism that too easily replaces an
initial naivety
or in a short-sighted narrow and
reactive
hedonism but in the establishment of the
stable
reliable
truthful and productive intimate
relationships friendships
apprenticeships civic bonds political
duties philosophical commitments and
religious habits and practices
in the absence of the structure and
direction produced by such bonds and
activities
the tragedy of life looms
unacceptably large
individuals subjected to suffering in
the absence of an orientation towards
meaning and responsibility becomes
cynical unstable hopeless
and alienated
then
resentful vengeful and dangerous
conservatives can offer
personal responsibility
the committed social bonds of marriage
family and job and true civic engagement
as valid and reliable antidotes to the
nihilism of unearned cynicism the
temptation of narrow short-term pleasure
and the demoralizing consequences of
faithless hopelessness
such advocates
can remind us all
that sacrifice
the willingness to forestall the
gratifications of the immediate moment
the willingness to engage in difficult
endeavors in the present to build
something worthwhile for the future the
moral obligation to withstand the trials
of immediate timely disagreement and
conflict to ensure a lasting peace
is a laudable
necessary and ultimately redeeming
activity
such advocates can finally
define a pathway through the pitfalls of
guilt
offering
atonement through responsibility
as the proper response to the inevitably
unequal distribution
of talents and privileges
community
the west has rightly emphasized the
value of the individual drawing on
traditions derived from rome
athens and jerusalem
the admirably liberal west
has properly and usefully articulated a
doctrine of individual rights
grounded in natural law in consequence
and that has led to an era of freedom
unparalleled in its productivity
generosity and universality
but
the highest ideal to which an individual
might aspire
cannot be grounded in an atomistic
individualism
or predicated on the assumption that the
highest manifestation of human striving
be akin to an isolated
self-actualization
conservatives
can rightly insist
the highest must serve the lowest
communally in the truly religious sense
can rightly observe that we find our
very sanity in relationship
to community
conservatives can note that sanity
itself both personal and social
is something continually and inescapably
negotiated
that there can simply not be the
happiness or the pursuit thereof at the
individual level
in the absence of the optimally
functioning social surround a purely
individual ethos is shallow
unsustainable unworthy and fragile
what do we do when our happiness
vanishes
a purely individual ethos
fails to provide the orientation crucial
for the upward striving that constitutes
hope
the integrity necessary to resist
temptation the antidote to the dangerous
and narcissistic expansion of ego and
presumption
or the bounds of love
that support us
through tribulation
trial
and tragedy
[Music]
stewardship those who uphold the
conservative ethos
can offer
responsible stewardship as the
appropriate response
to the necessity of maintaining harmony
in our relationship with the natural
world upon which our lives ultimately
depend
this is an extension
of the proper canonical response
to the treasures of the historical past
that which is valuable
should be recognized valued maintained
guarded
and passed on down the generational
chain
the scope of human activities has
expanded in recent decades
to a scale that makes of those
activities a genuine planetary force
this presents us with real dangers as
well as unparalleled opportunities
panicked
apocalyptic thinking
in relation to the former
demoralizes
invites a careless and self-serving
demonization and derogation
and justifies the kind of impulsive in
cautious reactive global response
that can easily produce unforeseen
problems of the same magnitude or
greater than the original problem
thoughtful stewards of the natural world
governed by the doctrines intrinsic to
the western canon
can as an alternative
recognize the particulars of the
problems characterizing the relationship
between our industrial culture and the
natural world can confidently note
the fact that the human ingenuity most
effectively manifested in free societies
has
and might endlessly and ever more
efficiently continue to ameliorate
poverty and rectify excessive inequality
can encourage conceptualization of the
human population and its constituent
individuals
as a net good in the planetary context
can deliver to young people first and
foremost the message that people of
faith courage and good will
can manage the very real problems that
confront us
and make the future not the apocalypse
that is always threatening
but the eternally productive
and abundant garden
that we may all
tend
and inhabit
justice
every individual who strives upward in
the optimal and socially beneficial
manner
deserves and must be granted the
benefits attendant upon the consequences
of that striving
this is the judicious and discerning
recognition rewarding and reinforcement
of productive and generous ability this
is the justice that fosters and
maintains that productive generosity at
the individual and the social level this
is the justice
that applies discriminating attention to
the endeavors and utterances of past and
present
and enables constant separation of wheat
from chaff
this
is the justice that has in the past and
must continue to be in the future
the irreplaceable
necessary and corrective compliment
to what would otherwise be
the in cautious
too forgiving
and infantilizing
universal compassion that too easily
masquerades and demands recognition
as moral virtue itself
conservatives can rightly insist
it is this true and comprehensive
justice
grounded in the irreplaceable traditions
of our forebears that has been and must
continue to be both available and
applied equally to all citizens
regardless of birth or circumstances
tradition
conservatives must state with courageous
faith and confidence
the fundamental institutions of the west
are solid
philosophically and practically
the idea that each individual is equal
before the law and of divine intrinsic
worth
is inextricably associated with the
presumption of the sovereign citizen
as well as the associated insistence
that the stability of the state
rests
upon the careful and truthful judgment
of that citizen
the idea that honest and untrammeled
discourse among men and women of
goodwill constitutes the eternal pathway
to the truth that refreshes and redeems
is a realization whose profundity of
conceptualization and reliability and
application
is unparalleled in human history the
parliaments congresses and senates where
those of us in the west transform the
inarticulate but reliable and
trustworthy sentiments and desires of
the people into the articulated body of
laws we all abide by are
fundamentally good and functional
but require the wise trust and act of
engagement
that conservatives would do well
to embody
and promote
marriage
not sexual satisfaction is the most
appropriate goal for love
children and adults flourish in stable
two-parent families the broader
community is best served by stable
marriage and family
the needs of those in absolute poverty
are best served by an uncorrupted and
genuinely cooperative and competitive
free market economy
the very real problem of inequality
is best solved by a commendable
combination of productivity and
generosity within the framework that
such structured systems provide
all of this
nests within the overarching framework
of the abrahamic canon bequeathed to us
by our forebears
and should be presented in a spirit of
gratitude and humility
as an inextricable part and parcel of
that inheritance
unity
a house divided against itself
cannot stand
respect for individual sovereignty
appreciation for the intact family
responsible engagement in civic
institutions gratitude for the
traditions that bind us and protect us
from chaos and courageous trust in the
essential good will of others
means unity
in both appearance and reality
conservatives at their best are
characterized by profound appreciation
for the necessity of such unity
apprehending it properly
as the basis for the peaceful
cooperation and competition that made
makes and keeps us strong
in the face of both adversity and enmity
such unity also provides for the
psychological and social predictability
and structure
that keeps the destabilizing terror of
uncertainty at bay as well as for the
shared communal purpose that provides
the very framework
for individual hope
the notion that no such unity is
possible or that it is always purchased
through the use of self-interested power
and compulsion
means
only
in the first case
that disunity and the chaos that
accompanies it is inevitable
and in the second
that a profound misunderstanding is in
place
regarding the causal relationship
between true stability and productive
peace and the principles of free choice
voluntary association reciprocal
exchange
mature capacity to forestall
gratification
and responsible action
the acceptance of these twin
presumptions dooms their holder
to a counterproductive and destabilizing
anxiety and aimless hopelessness and a
consequent bitter cynicism
and with no conceptual or practical
alternative
to the personal wielding
of arbitrary force this is a recipe
for personal doom and social catastrophe
conclusion
the blind and instrumental insistence
the truth is an illusion
and that nothing but power truly rules
has left virtually everything of true
and enduring use as a guide to purpose
and a bulwark against despair
abandoned
on the wayside
the demoralized people of the west
and indeed in the rest of the world are
therefore crying out
for the restoration of the abdicated
values of individual sovereignty
and responsible genuine social service
and purpose
whose acceptance and embodiment
make our free societies possible
productive admirable
generative
and stable
conservatives
who abide by the dictates of the eternal
western canon have the opportunity
beckoning in front of them
to once again make the case
that the principles upon which we
operate the virtues in which we believe
and the freedom we have been divinely
granted
truly and eternally constitute the basis
for the life more abundant which people
of good faith desire
and which we have every ability
to establish and maintain
thank you all for watching and listening
i
genuinely hope that you find the vision
that is beginning to be elaborated in
this document
compelling and engaging
i'm going to add to it two appendices
which i'll tape separately we'll call
them
a conservative manifesto colon
appendices
which detail out
two additional topics one related to
poverty and inequality and their nature
and amelioration and the second dealing
with the
precise nature of the relationship
between personal responsibility and
meaningful engagement and so
if you
appreciated this first
manifesto then give some consideration
to also attending to the appendices
thanks again for your time and attention